---
title: "The Tractor Pull"
author: John Sambrook
tags: [journal]
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/tractor-pull-2.jpg
---

![Tractor Pull](/assets/img/tractor-pull-2.jpg)

<!-- [Audio Discussion](https://common-sense.com/assets/files/tractor-pull.mp3) -->

Sarah stops by Marco's office to talk about a recent topic they
discussed in a team meeting. Sarah wants to know a bit more about what
Marco wants to achieve. They have a good discussion and Marco shares
an analogy. Sarah gets it immediately and winds up with a happy
assignment from Marco.

Links to additional resources are at the end of this article.

Please note that all people and companies mentioned in this article
are fictional.

 ***

The Sarah and the Tractor Pull

Sarah knocked on Marco's office door, finding him at his standing desk
reviewing some code. He looked up with a warm smile. "Hey Sarah, come
on in."

"Thanks, Marco. I wanted to tell you how much I appreciated
yesterday's discussion about assertion checking," Sarah said, settling
into one of the chairs across from his desk. "It really helped clarify
our approach for Denali."

Marco nodded, lowering his desk and taking a seat. "I'm glad you found
it useful. What particularly resonated with you?"

"Well, the whole strategy makes a lot of sense technically," Sarah
replied. "But I'm curious about the bigger picture. Why is this kind
of structured approach so important for our development process
itself?"

Marco's eyes lit up at the question. "That's exactly the kind of
thinking I like to see, Sarah. You're looking beyond the technical
details to understand the broader impact." He paused for a moment,
gathering his thoughts. "What I'm really trying to do is improve the
flow of quality work in our team."

"Flow of quality work?" Sarah leaned forward, interested.

"Yes. I'm working to understand the sources of variation in our daily
work," Marco explained. "The goal is to make our work more predictable
and consistently high-quality. It's about improving both our
throughput and the quality of what we deliver."

Sarah nodded slowly. "And controlling variation helps with that?"

"Absolutely. You can't manage a process that's out of control – that's
unpredictable," Marco said. "That's why we focus so much on best
practices like our assertion strategy. It helps reduce unnecessary
variation in how we work." He paused, then asked, "Sarah, have you
ever been to a tractor pull?"

Sarah's face brightened with recognition. "Oh yes! When I was younger,
I used to go to them from time to time. The noise, the excitement –
watching those machines strain against increasingly heavy loads. It
was quite a spectacle."

Marco grinned. "Perfect! Then you know exactly what happens. The
tractor starts out strong, but as it moves forward, the weight it's
pulling gets heavier and heavier. Eventually, it usually stalls out –
lots of noise, smoke, and flames, but no forward progress."

"Just spinning its wheels," Sarah added, nodding.

"Exactly. And here's the connection to our work – I want to make sure
that on the Denali project, we don't fall into that same pattern. We
don't want the work to become progressively harder as we go along,
until we're just spinning our wheels."

Sarah's eyes widened with understanding. "So practices like our
assertion strategy..."

"Help keep the workload constant," Marco finished. "By catching issues
early, maintaining clear standards, and preventing technical debt from
accumulating, we avoid that increasing drag on our progress."

"That makes so much sense," Sarah said thoughtfully. "But how do we
measure whether we're succeeding at keeping the workload flat?"

"That's a great question," Marco replied. "We can look at things like
the rate of new issues being discovered, the time it takes to
implement new features, and the stability of our testing cycles. If
these metrics start trending up over time, it might indicate we're
starting to pull too heavy a load."

Sarah nodded enthusiastically. "And I suppose our assertion failures
during testing could be another indicator – if we start seeing more of
them, especially in areas we thought were stable, that might suggest
we're accumulating complexity."

"Exactly right," Marco said, clearly pleased with her
insights. "Sarah, would you be interested in leading a discussion
about this with the team? I think you could help everyone understand
how our technical practices connect to these broader goals."

Sarah sat up straighter, surprised but clearly interested. "Really?
Yes, I'd love to help with that. It would be a great opportunity to
explore these ideas further."

"Excellent," Marco said. "Take some time to think about how you want
to present it. Maybe we could start with the tractor pull analogy and
then dive into specific examples from our work."

"I'll start putting some thoughts together," Sarah said, standing
up. "Thanks, Marco. This has given me a whole new perspective on why
we do things the way we do."

As Sarah left his office, Marco smiled, satisfied that the
conversation had helped another team member understand the deeper
purpose behind their development practices. It was these kinds of
discussions that helped build not just better software, but a better
team.
