---
title: "Software Team Dynamics: Marco's Experiment"
author: John Sambrook
tags: [journal]
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/med-device-developer.jpg
---

![A MedTech Developer](/assets/img/med-device-developer.jpg "A medical device developer at MedTech")

[Audio Discussion](https://common-sense.com/assets/files/marcos-experiment.mp3)

Marco and Sam meet at their usual breakfast place and continue the
discussion they had in Sam's garage last week. As they discuss things,
Marco begins to if what they discussed might relate to the dynamics of
the software team he manages at MedTech. He decides to run a small
experiment.

How does Sam receive Marco's suggestion, and is Marco on to something
important or chasing ghosts?

Links to additional resources are at the end of this article.

Please note that all people and companies mentioned in this article
are fictional.

 ***

Software Team Dynamics: Marco's Experiment

Sam pushed open the heavy door of George's restaurant, briefly musing
on how the weight seemed to symbolize the gradual loss of strength
that comes with aging. As he stepped inside, he spotted Marco, his
best friend of many years, sitting at their usual table. Despite their
age difference of about twenty years, Sam and Marco had forged a deep
bond, beginning at a Men's Retreat Weekend hosted by Robert Glover
years ago. Marco looked up, noticed Sam, and waved him over with a
warm smile.

"Hey, stud," Sam said with a grin as he settled into the seat across
from Marco. "How's life in the fast-paced world of software
engineering?"

Marco chuckled at the familiar greeting. "Hey, old timer. It's going
well. MedTech is keeping me on my toes, as usual. How about you? Still
contemplating the mysteries of the universe?"

"You know me," Sam replied, his eyes twinkling. "Can't help but ponder
the big questions. Speaking of which, I enjoyed our discussion last
week about free will."

Marco nodded, his expression turning thoughtful. "I enjoyed it too,
Sam. But I have to tell you, I'm not entirely convinced."

"I'd be surprised if you were," Sam chuckled. "It's a very difficult
concept to wrap our heads around. And I've often wondered why people
have such a strong, negative reaction when I bring up the topic."

"Yeah, I've noticed that too," Marco agreed. "It's like touching a raw
nerve for some people. Why do you think that is?"

Sam leaned back, considering. "I think it has to do with a person's
identity. In other words, their sense of who they are."

"And how does that relate to free will?" Marco asked, genuinely
curious.

"Well, think about it this way," Sam began. "Almost as soon as we're
born, our parents and others start to tell us, in one way or another,
who we are. You're a 'good baby' as they coo and smile at you. And
that conditioning continues through childhood."

Marco nodded, "Yeah, I can see that. Like when parents say, 'You're
such a smart boy' or 'You're mommy's little helper.'"

"Exactly!" Sam exclaimed. "And it doesn't stop there. Remember when
you were in school and got a good grade? What did the teacher say?"

Marco grinned, "Oh, something like, 'Great job, Marco! You're so
talented at math.'"

"Right," Sam continued. "And what about when you didn't do so well?"

Marco's grin faded slightly. "Well, then it was more like, 'You need
to apply yourself more, Marco. You're not living up to your
potential.'"

"See?" Sam said, leaning forward. "It's all about shaping our
identity. And it doesn't stop in childhood. Think about your first job
interview."

Marco laughed. "Oh man, I remember being told I had 'leadership
potential' and was a 'team player.' I barely knew what those meant at
the time."

"But you internalized it, didn't you?" Sam pressed. "You started to
see yourself that way."

"I guess I did," Marco admitted. "And now that I think about it, I
catch myself doing the same thing. Like when I nail a presentation at
work, I think, 'That's just who I am. I'm good at this.'"

Sam nodded enthusiastically. "Exactly! And what about when things
don't go well?"

Marco thought for a moment. "Well, if I bomb a presentation, I'm more
likely to blame external factors. Like, 'The client was in a bad mood'
or 'The projector wasn't working right.'"

"Bingo!" Sam exclaimed. "That's the crux of it. We internalize the
good and externalize the bad. It's a form of self-preservation, I
think."

Their conversation paused as Jason, their friend and server,
approached with a pot of coffee. After exchanging pleasantries and
placing their usual orders—a Keto plate for Sam and country-fried
steak for Marco—they returned to their discussion.

"So, where were we?" Sam asked, stirring his coffee idly.

"We were talking about how we internalize the good and externalize the
bad," Marco reminded him. "But how does this tie back to free will?"

Sam took a sip of his coffee before responding. "Well, think about
it. If we believe that all our good qualities and successes are purely
the result of our own choices and efforts, what does that imply?"

Marco's eyes widened with realization. "That we have free will. That
we're in control of our actions and their outcomes."

"Exactly," Sam nodded. "And if we believe that, then any suggestion
that we don't have free will feels like..."

"An attack on our very identity," Marco finished. "Wow, I never
thought of it that way before."

"It goes even deeper," Sam continued. "As we grow older, we start to
reinforce this conditioning ourselves. We set goals, make plans, and
congratulate ourselves when we achieve them. We tell ourselves, 'I did
this. I made this happen.'"

Marco nodded thoughtfully. "And I suppose when we fail to meet our
goals, we're more likely to blame circumstances. 'I didn't have enough
time' or 'The market conditions weren't right.'"

"Precisely," Sam agreed. "It's a self-reinforcing cycle. And it makes
it very difficult for people to even consider the idea that free will
might be an illusion."

As their food arrived, Sam continued, "You know, Marco, I've been a
student of this topic for many years now. I've developed a lay
understanding of neuroscience, and I find the work of Robert Sapolsky,
the professor emeritus from Stanford, particularly fascinating."

Marco looked intrigued. "Sapolsky? I don't think I'm familiar with his
work."

"Oh, he's brilliant," Sam enthused. "He recently published a book
called 'Determined' that really dives into these issues. It's a
comprehensive look at how our behavior is shaped by factors beyond our
conscious control."

"That sounds interesting," Marco said, jotting down the title on his
phone. "I'll have to look it up. Any videos of his talks on YouTube?"

Sam nodded eagerly. "Absolutely. Sapolsky is a fantastic speaker. His
lectures are engaging and often quite funny. You should definitely
check them out."

"I will," Marco promised. "Anyone else you'd recommend on this topic?"

"Well, I'm also a fan of Sam Harris's work," Sam
replied. "Particularly his book on free will from around 2012. Harris
comes at it from both a neuroscientific and philosophical
perspective."

Marco whistled low. "Sounds like you've really done your homework on
this, Sam. It reminds me of how we've both worked on ourselves since
that first Men's Retreat Weekend. Always learning, always growing."

Sam smiled, remembering their shared journey. "That's right. We've
come a long way from being 'Mr. Nice Guys,' haven't we?"

"We sure have," Marco agreed. "And speaking of growth, I've been
thinking about how I could apply some of these ideas to my work at
MedTech."

Sam leaned forward, intrigued. "Oh? What did you have in mind?"

"Well," Marco began, "what if I did an informal study of my software
engineering team? Looking at how these ideas about free will and
determinism might affect our team dynamics and productivity."

Sam's eyes lit up. "That's a fantastic idea, Marco! What kind of
things would you look at?"

Marco leaned forward, excited now. "Well, for starters, I could
observe how team members attribute successes and failures. Are they
internalizing the good outcomes and externalizing the bad, like we
discussed earlier?"

"Excellent," Sam nodded. "What else?"

"I could also look at how our reward systems and performance reviews
might be reinforcing certain beliefs about agency and responsibility,"
Marco continued. "And maybe explore how a deeper understanding of
these concepts could lead to more effective and empathetic management
practices."

Sam was grinning now. "Marco, I think you're onto something big
here. This could potentially revolutionize how we approach software
engineering and help our colleagues get more satisfaction from their
work."

Marco nodded, his food momentarily forgotten as ideas raced through
his mind. "Exactly! If we can help people understand that their
successes and failures aren't solely the result of their individual
choices, but part of a complex web of factors, it might reduce stress
and increase empathy in the workplace."

"And potentially lead to more collaborative and supportive team
environments," Sam added. "It's a far cry from the 'nice guy' mindset
we used to have, where we might have avoided conflict or tried to
please everyone at our own expense."

"Right," Marco agreed. "Instead of fostering a cutthroat,
individualistic culture, or being passive and conflict-avoidant, we
could create an atmosphere where people understand that we're all
influenced by factors beyond our control, and that success is a
collective endeavor."

Sam sat back, looking impressed. "Marco, my friend, I think the ideas
we've been discussing here could indeed be incredibly helpful in that
work. You're applying these philosophical concepts to real-world
situations in a way that could have tangible benefits."

Marco smiled, picking up his fork again. "Thanks, Sam. I'm excited to
explore this further. Maybe next time we meet, I'll have some initial
observations to share."

"I'm looking forward to it already," Sam said, raising his coffee cup
in a toast. "Here's to free will, determinism, and better software
engineering practices!"

Marco laughed, clinking his glass against Sam's cup. "Cheers to that,
old timer!"

As they finished their meal, both friends felt energized by the
conversation and the potential applications of these complex ideas to
everyday life and work. They knew that this was just the beginning of
a long and fruitful exploration, another chapter in their enduring
friendship and personal growth journey.

 ***

Additional Resources

1. [Non-Violent Communication (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DgaeHeIL39Y)

2. [Arguments Against Personal Identity (YouTube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17WiQ_tNld4)

<!-- I also invite you to listen to the
[audio](https://common-sense.com/assets/files/sams-garage.mp3)
discussion of the chapter. -->

