---
title: "Maintaining Software Team Purpose: Marco Leads a Team Discussion"
author: John Sambrook
tags: [journal]
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/software-purpose.jpg
---

![Team Meeting](/assets/img/software-purpose.jpg "Marco's team meeting in the Jupiter conference room")

<!-- [Audio Discussion](https://common-sense.com/assets/files/maintaining-purpose.mp3) -->

When a powerful reminder of purpose touches a software team, how do
they maintain that energy and translate it into lasting change? At
MedTech, Marco and his team face exactly this challenge after Robert
Fisher's moving presentation about his daughter Sophie.

This story explores how a team takes an emotional spark and transforms
it into sustainable technical excellence - and what they learn about
themselves along the way.

Please note that all people and companies mentioned in this article
are fictional.

***

The late afternoon sun slanted through the Jupiter conference room
windows, catching dust motes still settling after the all-hands
meeting. Marco sat at his desk, his coffee growing cold as he
reflected on Robert Fisher's powerful words about his daughter Sophie
and the MedTech Rainier pump that had helped save her life.

He glanced at his team's Slack channel, noting the unusual quiet -
everyone still processing what they'd heard. After a moment's
consideration, he typed out a message: "Team, let's gather in Jupiter
in 15 minutes. I think we should talk about what Robert's message
means for us."

The responses came quickly - thumbs up emojis from Sarah and Raj,
"omw" from Tom, and "üëç grabbing coffee first" from Rachel. Soon
enough, they were settling into their usual spots around the
conference table, the energy in the room noticeably different than
their typical technical discussions.

Before Marco could begin, Rachel spoke up, her voice thoughtful. "You
know what struck me about Mr. Fisher?" she said, wrapping her hands
around her coffee cup. "Here's this guy who seems to have everything -
successful, confident, arrives in a helicopter of all things." She
paused, gathering her thoughts. "But when he talked about trying to
have children, about the IVF attempts, the adoption process... and
then nearly losing Sophie..." Her voice trailed off.

Sarah nodded slowly. "Yeah, I noticed that too. All that success and
privilege didn't shield him from suffering. When he described watching
every breath, every heartbeat on those monitors..." She shook her
head. "That kind of helplessness is universal, isn't it?"

"It made him more real," Tom added quietly. "Not just some executive
in an expensive suit, but a father who went through something terrible
and came out wanting to share it with us. To help us understand why
our work matters."

Raj, who had been quietly listening, spoke up. "Makes you think about
Grant too." He referred to their CEO. "I always saw him as this
untouchable figure, but did you see his face during the presentation?
He looked as moved as any of us."

Marco let the moment settle before speaking. "I think you're touching
on something important here. No matter who we are or what we've
achieved, we all face moments of vulnerability and suffering. And our
work here - writing software for medical devices - it's about being
there for people in those moments."

Mei straightened in her chair. "So when we talk about quality and
reliability, it's not just about meeting specifications or passing
audits. It's about being there when someone's child is fighting for
their life."

"Exactly," Marco said, standing to move toward the whiteboard. "Now
the question is: how do we take that understanding and turn it into
action? How do we build systems that honor both the suffering and the
hope in stories like Sophie's?"

Sarah, who had been absently turning her coffee cup in her hands,
spoke again. "It really hit home when he talked about the pump running
for three days straight without a single glitch. That's not just good
engineering - that's life-saving reliability."

"Exactly," Tom added, leaning forward in his chair. "But it makes me
wonder - how do we make sure every piece of code we write lives up to
that standard? It's one thing to say quality is important, but another
to actually deliver it consistently."

Marco nodded thoughtfully. "That's exactly what I want us to figure
out. But instead of just making general commitments to quality, I want
us to be specific about how we get there." He stood and moved to the
whiteboard, uncapping a marker. "And I think I have some tools that
can help us think this through systematically."

"You've been talking to Sam again, haven't you?" Rachel asked with a
knowing smile. The team had heard about Marco's mentor before, and his
influence on Marco's approach to problem-solving was becoming
familiar.

Marco grinned. "Guilty as charged. But this time, I think what I
learned from him is exactly what we need." He drew five connected
boxes on the whiteboard. "This is called an Evaporating Cloud - it's a
tool for resolving conflicts that seem impossible to solve."

"Like the conflict between speed and quality?" Mei asked, looking up
from her tablet.

"Exactly," Marco confirmed. "Let's map out our situation." He began
labeling the boxes. "Our goal is to create successful medical devices
that help patients. To do that, we need to meet deadlines to get
Denali to market, but we also need to ensure absolute quality and
safety. These requirements seem to conflict, but maybe they don't have
to."

Lisa, who had been quiet until now, leaned forward. "How does this
help us resolve the conflict?"

"By helping us surface our assumptions," Marco explained. "We think we
have to choose between speed and quality because we assume certain
things about how work gets done. But what if those assumptions aren't
completely true?"

He drew arrows between the boxes, explaining how each connection
represented an assumption they could challenge. "For instance, we
might assume that ensuring quality means extensively testing every
possible scenario, which takes time. But what if we could build
quality into our process from the start, so we spend less time fixing
issues later?"

Tom's eyes lit up with understanding. "Like our assertion checking
strategy - by catching issues early, we actually save time in the long
run."

"Exactly," Marco smiled. "And that brings me to another tool I want to
show you." He moved to the adjacent whiteboard and began drawing a
tree-like structure. "This is called a Future Reality Tree. It helps
us map out how changes we make today create the future we want."

Rachel studied the diagram with interest. "So we start with our goal
at the top?"

"Right," Marco confirmed, writing 'Consistently deliver life-saving
medical devices' at the top of the tree. "Then we work backward,
identifying what needs to happen to make that possible. Let's build
this together."

For the next hour, the team worked on their Future Reality Tree,
mapping out the connections between their daily practices and their
ultimate goal. They identified key changes needed:

1. Implement automated testing that mimics real-world scenarios
2. Build quality checks into every stage of development
3. Maintain a sustainable pace to prevent burnout and errors
4. Create clear communication channels with other departments
5. Establish regular reviews of their assertion strategy

As they worked, Marco noticed the energy in the room shifting from
emotional inspiration to focused determination. They weren't just
moved by Robert's story anymore - they were building a concrete plan
to honor it.

"You know what strikes me?" Sarah said, stepping back to look at their
completed tree. "This isn't just about writing better code. It's about
building better systems that naturally produce quality."

Mei nodded. "And it ties back to what we discussed about maintaining a
flat demand curve. If we manage our workflow better, we don't have to
choose between speed and quality."

Marco felt a surge of pride in his team. They weren't just paying lip
service to Robert's story - they were using it as a catalyst for real
change. "This is exactly what I hoped would happen," he said. "We're
not just reacting to an emotional moment. We're building something
sustainable."

As the team began gathering their things, Tom paused. "Marco, do you
think we could share this approach with other departments? It feels
like this kind of systematic thinking could help everyone."

Marco smiled, remembering his conversations with Sam about local
versus global optima. "That's a great idea, Tom. In fact, I think
that's our next challenge - helping the whole organization think this
way. But first, let's prove it works with our team."

Walking back to his desk later, Marco pulled out his phone to text
Sam: "Remember what you said about TOC being about Focus? I think I'm
starting to really get it. Coffee this weekend?"

The response came quickly: "Same place, same time. Bring your Future
Reality Tree - I want to see what you're building."

Marco smiled, pocketing his phone. Robert Fisher's story had provided
the spark, but it was their systematic approach to improvement that
would keep the fire burning. That's how they would honor Sophie's
story - not just with emotion, but with excellence built into every
line of code they wrote.

***

Key Takeaways:

1. Emotional inspiration needs systematic follow-through to create
   lasting change
2. Tools like the Evaporating Cloud and Future Reality Tree can help
   transform inspiration into action
3. Building quality into processes is more effective than trying to
   test it in later
4. Sustainable improvement requires understanding and challenging our
   assumptions
5. Real change happens when we connect our daily work to its ultimate
   purpose

***

Additional Resources:

1. "Critical Chain" by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
   - Explores project management through the Theory of Constraints lens

2. "Thinking for a Change: Putting the TOC Thinking Processes to Use" by Lisa J. Scheinkopf
   - Detailed guide to TOC Thinking Processes including the Evaporating Cloud and Future Reality Tree

3. "The Choice" by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
   - Discusses the fundamental concepts behind TOC thinking tools

4. "Theory of Constraints Handbook" edited by James F. Cox III and John G. Schleier Jr.
   - Comprehensive reference for TOC tools and applications
