---
title: "Improving Software Group Practice with AI"
author: John Sambrook
tags: [journal]
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/sam-and-marco-at-the-cut-shop.jpg
published: true
---

![Sam and Marco](/assets/img/sam-and-marco-at-the-cut-shop.jpg)

[Audio Discussion](https://common-sense.com/assets/files/sam-marco-ai-tools.mp3)

After a productive team meeting[^1] where Marco's software group used
TOC (Theory of Constraints) tools to channel their inspiration from
Robert Fisher's visit into concrete actions, Marco reaches out to Sam
to share their progress. What he discovers is that his old friend has
been developing new ways to enhance these traditional TOC tools using
modern AI capabilities.

Key take-aways and links to additional resources are at the end of
this article.

Please note that all people and companies mentioned in this article
are fictional.

***

Title: "Improving Software Group Practice with AI"

After witnessing the powerful impact of Robert Fisher's story on his
team, Marco was eager to channel their renewed sense of purpose into
concrete improvements. His software group had spent the past week
using TOC tools to map out their path forward, and now he wanted Sam's
perspective on their work.

That Saturday at The Cut Shop, Marco pulled out his phone while Sam
nursed his usual shot of whiskey. "Remember those TOC tools you taught
me? Look how the team adapted them after Fisher's visit." He showed
Sam their Future Reality Tree, carefully documented in his meeting
notes.

Sam studied the image with interest. "Good connections here. How did
the team take to the process?"

"Better than expected. Even Tom got engaged when he saw how it could
help maintain quality while meeting deadlines. But getting everyone to
spend hours on these diagrams..." Marco shook his head. "That's the
challenge."

"Interesting timing," said Sam, warming to the topic, "I've been
working with TOC tools since the early '90s. Back then, I was
fortunate to learn from Bill Dettmer[^2] when he was teaching at
USC. His work on making these tools practical for business really
shaped my approach. Now I'm finding ways to make them even more
accessible with AI."

Marco's skepticism was immediate. "AI? Sam, we're developing medical
devices. We need rigorous, validated processes, not the latest tech
fad."

"Fair concern," Sam acknowledged. "But consider this - what if AI
could help surface assumptions and test logical connections faster,
leaving more time for the critical thinking that requires human
expertise?"

"You really think AI could handle the complexities of medical device
development? FDA requirements?"

Sam opened his laptop. "Let me show you something practical. We'll
analyze your team's tree and you can judge for yourself."

As Sam engaged in a back and forth dialogue with Claude, Marco's
eyebrows rose. Claude wasn't just processing their input - it was
identifying potential regulatory compliance issues they hadn't
considered and suggesting connections based on medical device
development best practices.

As Sam demonstrated, Claude analyzed their tree: "Consider the
connection between 'Improved Testing Coverage' and 'Faster Release
Cycles.' There's an unstated assumption here about automated test
infrastructure. In medical device development, this requires
validation of the automation tools themselves."

Marco was impressed, and gave out a low whistle before saying "That's
exactly the kind of detail we might have missed..."

Sam explained how Claude combined knowledge of software development,
medical device regulations, and TOC principles. "It's not replacing
our expertise - it's helping us apply it more effectively."

They spent the next hour working with Claude to analyze their Current
Reality Tree, exploring the core conflicts driving their
challenges. Marco watched in fascination as the AI helped them surface
hidden assumptions and strengthen their logical connections.

"The real power," Sam explained, "comes when we combine this with
visualization tools." He demonstrated how they could export their
analysis to Flying Logic, transforming their work into clear,
professional diagrams that revealed patterns they might have missed.

Marco's initial skepticism had evolved into cautious enthusiasm. "This
could help us maintain the momentum from Fisher's visit. But
implementing new tools in a regulated environment..."

"Start small," Sam suggested. "Use it first for exploration and
analysis. Let the team see its value naturally, like they did with the
TOC tools."

Later, as they wrapped up, Marco reflected on their discussion. "You
know what strikes me? Fisher's visit showed us why our work
matters. These tools could help us live up to that responsibility more
effectively."

Sam nodded. "Exactly. Emotion provides the energy for change, but you
need good tools to channel that energy productively."

As they headed out, Marco couldn't help but marvel at how far they'd
come - from their early discussions about free will and personal
growth, to exploring how AI could enhance their understanding of
complex systems. Yet through it all, the fundamental principle
remained unchanged: never lose sight of the human impact of their
work.

"Thanks, Sam," Marco said as they walked to their cars. "Not just for
showing me these tools, but for always helping me see the bigger
picture."

Sam smiled, putting his hand on Marco's shoulder. "Marco, the work you
and your team is doing touches so many lives in ways you will never
know. I am fortunate to be able to watch it all unfold."

***

Key Takeaways

1. Emotional Drive + Systematic Analysis: Combining the emotional
   impact of stories like Fisher's with systematic analysis tools
   creates powerful, sustainable change.

2. Technology as an Enabler: Modern AI tools can enhance traditional
   analysis methods, making them more accessible and powerful.

3. Continuous Improvement: Even good analyses can be refined and
   improved with the right tools and perspective.

4. The Human Element: While technology can enhance our analysis, the
   fundamental focus remains on human impact and real-world results.

***

Additional Resources

1. [Flying Logic Professional](https://flyinglogic.com/)
   - Professional software for creating and analyzing logic trees

2. ["Thinking for a Change: Putting the TOC Thinking Processes to
   Use"](https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Change-Putting-Processes-Use/dp/1574440632)
   by Lisa J. Scheinkopf
   - Comprehensive guide to TOC thinking processes

3. [Introduction to System Thinking](https://less.works/less/principles/systems-thinking.html)
   - Overview of systems thinking principles and their application

4. ["The Choice"](https://www.amazon.com/Choice-Eliyahu-M-Goldratt/dp/0884271900) by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
   - Explores the fundamental concepts behind TOC thinking tools

***

Footnotes

[^1]: Prior article: [Maintaining a Sense of Purpose](https://common-sense.com/blog/keeping-a-sense-of-purpose)
[^2]: Bill Dettmer wrote several influential books on TOC, including "The Logical Thinking Process" (2007) and "Strategic Navigation" (2003). He is known for making TOC's Thinking Processes more accessible and practical for business use.
